.\" Man page for Easy SQLdumper
.\" Contact: https://github.com/nerdwarts/easy_sqldumper
.TH SQLDUMPER 1 "2026-03-28" "v1.3.0" "Easy SQLdumper Manual"

.SH NAME
sqldumper \- create timestamped SQL backups of MySQL/MariaDB and PostgreSQL databases

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBsqldumper\fR [\fB\-config\fR \fIfile\fR] [\fB\-db\fR \fIname\fR] [\fB\-dir\fR \fIpath\fR] [\fB\-type\fR \fImysql\fR|\fIpostgres\fR]
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sqldumper
is a CLI tool that wraps
.BR mysqldump (1)
or
.BR pg_dump (1)
to create timestamped SQL backup files, configured via a TOML file.
.PP
When run without the
.B \-db
flag, an interactive multiselect TUI opens, letting you pick one or more
databases to back up in a single run.
When
.B \-db
is supplied the tool runs non-interactively — suitable for cron jobs and scripts.
.PP
Databases can be reached directly (local binaries in
.IR $PATH ),
inside a Docker container
.RB ( "docker exec" ),
or inside a Kubernetes pod
.RB ( "kubectl exec" ).

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-config " " \fIfile\fR
Path to the TOML configuration file.
Default:
.IR ./easy_sql_config.toml .

.TP
.BR \-db " " \fIname\fR
Name of the database to back up (non-interactive / scripting mode).
When omitted the interactive multiselect TUI opens.

.TP
.BR \-dir " " \fIpath\fR
Directory in which backup files are saved.
Default:
.IR ./backup .

.TP
.BR \-type " " \fImysql\fR|\fIpostgres\fR
Database engine. Overrides the
.B type
field in the
.B [database]
section of the config file. Accepted values:
.IR mysql " (default),"
.IR postgres .

.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
The configuration file uses TOML syntax. By default
.B sqldumper
looks for
.I easy_sql_config.toml
in the current working directory.

.SS [database]
.TP
.B type
Database engine:
.IR mysql " (default) or " postgres .
.TP
.B user
Database user name.
.TP
.B password
Database password. Never passed as a plain CLI argument — see
.BR SECURITY .
.TP
.B host
Hostname or IP address of the database server.
.TP
.B port
TCP port. Defaults to
.B 3306
for MySQL/MariaDB and
.B 5432
for PostgreSQL when omitted.

.SS [ssl]
Applies to MySQL/MariaDB only.
.TP
.B enabled
Set to
.B true
to enable SSL/TLS. When
.B false
all other SSL fields are ignored.
.TP
.B ca
Path to the CA certificate file. Required when
.B enabled = true.
.TP
.B cert
Path to the client certificate file. Must be set together with
.BR key .
.TP
.B key
Path to the client private key file. Must be set together with
.BR cert .
.TP
.B verify_server_cert
Set to
.B true
to verify the server certificate against
.BR ca .
Requires
.B ca
to be set.

.SS [remote]
.TP
.B type
Execution mode:
.IR local " (default),"
.IR docker ,
.IR kubernetes " (or " k8s ).
.TP
.B container
Docker container name (required for
.IR docker " mode)."
Also used as the container name inside a Kubernetes pod (optional).
.TP
.B pod
Kubernetes pod name (required for
.IR kubernetes " mode)."
.TP
.B namespace
Kubernetes namespace. Defaults to the current
.BR kubectl (1)
context namespace when omitted.
.TP
.B mysql_bin
Name of the MySQL client binary inside the target. Default:
.IR mysql .
.TP
.B mysqldump_bin
Name of the mysqldump binary inside the target. Default:
.IR mysqldump .
.TP
.B psql_bin
Name of the psql binary inside the target. Default:
.IR psql .
.TP
.B pgdump_bin
Name of the pg_dump binary inside the target. Default:
.IR pg_dump .

.SH INTERACTIVE TUI
When
.B \-db
is not supplied
.B sqldumper
fetches the list of available databases and opens a multiselect menu.
.PP
.TS
l l.
Key	Action
\fB↑\fR / \fB↓\fR	Navigate up / down
\fBx\fR or \fBSpace\fR	Toggle selection
\fBCtrl+A\fR	Select / deselect all
\fBEnter\fR	Confirm selection and start backups
\fBCtrl+C\fR	Quit without doing anything
.TE

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Open the interactive multiselect TUI:
.B sqldumper

.TP
Back up a single database non-interactively:
.B sqldumper -db mydb

.TP
Use a custom config file and output directory:
.B sqldumper -db mydb -config /etc/easy_sql_config.toml -dir /var/backups/mysql

.TP
Override the database engine at runtime:
.B sqldumper -type postgres

.TP
Run as a daily cron job:
.nf
0 2 * * * /usr/local/bin/sqldumper -db mydb -dir /var/backups/mysql >> /var/log/sqldumper.log 2>&1
.fi

.SH OUTPUT
Backup files are named:
.PP
.I <dir>/<dbname>_<YYYY-MM-DD_HH-MM-SS>.sql
.PP
Example:
.I ./backup/mydb_2026-03-28_02-00-00.sql
.PP
Partial files are removed automatically if the dump fails.

.SH SECURITY
Passwords are never passed as plain CLI arguments and are never visible in
.BR ps (1)
output.
.TP
.B Local MySQL/MariaDB
The password is written to a temporary
.I sqldumper-*.cnf
file and passed to
.BR mysqldump (1)
via
.BR \-\-defaults\-extra\-file .
The file is deleted immediately after the dump completes.
.TP
.B Local PostgreSQL
The password is set via the
.B PGPASSWORD
environment variable on the subprocess. No temp file is created.
.TP
.B Docker / Kubernetes
The password is injected via
.B MYSQL_PWD
(MySQL/MariaDB) or
.B PGPASSWORD
(PostgreSQL) directly inside the container process. No temp file is created on the host.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ./easy_sql_config.toml
Default configuration file location.
.TP
.I ./backup/
Default directory for backup files.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
.TP
.B Local MySQL/MariaDB mode
.BR mysql (1)
and
.BR mysqldump (1)
(or
.B mariadb
/
.BR mariadb-dump )
must be available in
.IR $PATH .
.TP
.B Local PostgreSQL mode
.BR psql (1)
and
.BR pg_dump (1)
must be available in
.IR $PATH .
.TP
.B Docker mode
.BR docker (1)
must be available in
.IR $PATH .
.TP
.B Kubernetes mode
.BR kubectl (1)
must be configured and available in
.IR $PATH .

.SH LICENSE
Copyright 2026 Nerdwarts.
.PP
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
See
.I https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
for the full license text.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mysqldump (1),
.BR pg_dump (1),
.BR docker (1),
.BR kubectl (1)





